E aí, você tem que saber analisar o perfil.
Existem alguns tipos de pessoa, né?
A gente chama dos takers, os givers e os matchers, né?
Os takers são aquelas pessoas que vão fazer network.
Beleza, e o que você agrega para mim?
Esse é o taker, né?
E o giver é aquela pessoa que está querendo dar e tudo mais.
E tem os matchers, né?
Os matchers são aquela pessoa que troca.
Tipo assim, beleza, eu te ajudo, mas o que você vai me ajudar em troca, né?
Qual que é a moeda aqui?
Então, esses são alguns perfis. PERFÍSES na carreira, no empreendedorismo, etc. Muitas das pessoas acham que é o matcher, né?
Mas não, a cadeia começa assim, a base é de givers, né?
Logo acima dos givers vem os takers,
porque aí é aquele ditado,
quando tem o encontro do malandro com o otário, né?
O encontro perfeito, porque aí o giver quer dar,
o taker quer tomar, então ele se aproveita do giver.
Então o taker começa a se aproveitar do giver.
E aí acima deles vem o matcher,
que aí ele consegue dosar e falar assim,
não, o taker, beleza, a gente troca alguma coisa,
mas você também tem que me ajudar.
Então ele consegue fazer a negociação.
Mas acima de todos os três, tem uma nova cadeia de givers,
que são os givers que aprenderam a não deixar os takers sobreporem eles e darem tudo a troco de nada.
Então os givers que conseguiram entender limites,
eles são as pessoas que mais ascendem e vão para o topo da cadeia.
Então, a posição mais nobre ali é o giver,
desde que, dentro da sua organização,
você consiga tirar essa cultura do taker.
Na hora que você tira isso aqui da equação,
os givers prosperam e acabam ascendendo ao topo da cadeia. Então você tem que proteger os fornecedores no seu meio.
E eu aprendi uma ótima lição sobre isso, do melhor networker da Fortune.
É o cara, não o gato.
Seu nome é Adam Rifkin.
He's a very successful serial entrepreneur
who spends a huge amount of his time helping other people.
And his secret weapon is the five-minute favor.
Adam said, look, you don't have to be Mother Teresa or Gandhi to be a giver.
You just have to find small ways to add large value to other people's lives.
And that could be as simple as making an introduction
between two people who could benefit from knowing each other.
It could be sharing your knowledge or giving a little bit of feedback.
Or it might be even something as basic as saying,
you know, I'm going to try to figure out if I can recognize
somebody whose work has gone unnoticed.
And those five-minute favors are really critical
to helping givers set boundaries and protect themselves.
And the second thing that matters,
if you want to build a culture where givers succeed,
is you actually need a culture where help-seeking is the norm,
where people ask a lot.
This may hit a little too close to home for some of you.
What you see with successful givers is they recognize that it's okay to be a receiver too.
And if you run an organization, we can actually make this easier.
We can make it easier for people to ask for help.
A couple of colleagues and I studied hospitals,
and we found that on certain floors, nurses did a lot of help-seeking,
and on other floors, they did very little of it.
And the factor that stood out on the floors where help-seeking was common,
where it was the norm,
was there was just one nurse whose sole job it was
to help other nurses on the unit. And when thateking was common, where it was the norm, was there was just one nurse whose sole job it was to help other nurses on the unit.
And when that role was available, nurses said,
oh, it's not embarrassing, it's not vulnerable
to ask for help, it's actually encouraged.
Now, help-seeking isn't important just for protecting
the success and the well-being of givers.
It's also critical to getting more people
to act like givers, because the data say
that somewhere between 75 and 90% of all giving in organizations starts with a request.
But a lot of people don't ask.
They don't want to look incompetent,
they don't know where to turn, they don't want to burden others.
And yet, if nobody ever asked for help,
you have a lot of frustrated givers in your organization
who would love to step up and contribute
if they only knew who could benefit and how.
But I think the most important thing,
if you want to build a culture of successful givers,
is to be thoughtful about who you let onto your team.
I figured, you want a culture of productive generosity,
you should hire a bunch of givers.
But I was surprised to discover, actually, that that was not right.
That the negative impact of a taker on a culture
is usually double to triple the positive impact of a giver.
Think about it this way.
One bad apple can spoil a barrel,
but one good egg just does not make a dozen.
I don't know what that means.
But I hope you do.
No, let even one taker into a team,
and you will see that the givers will stop helping.
They'll say, I'm surrounded by a bunch of snakes and sharks,
why should I contribute? Whereas if you let one giver into a team, you don't get an explosion of generosity. More often people are like, great, that person can do all our work.
So effective hiring and team building is not about bringing in the givers. It's about weeding
out the takers. And if you can do that well, you'll be left with givers and matchers. The
givers will be generous because they don't have to worry about the consequencesers. And if you can do that well, you'll be left with givers and matchers.
The givers will be generous because they don't have to worry about the consequences.
And the beauty of the matchers is that they follow the norm.
So how do you catch a taker before it's too late?
We're actually pretty bad at figuring out who's a taker,
especially on first impressions.
And there's a personality trait that throws us off.
It's called agreeableness,
one of the major dimensions of personality across cultures.
Agreeable people are warm and friendly, they're nice, they're polite.
You find a lot of them in Canada.
Where there was actually a national contest
to come up with a new Canadian slogan and fill in the blank as Canadian as ...
And I thought the winning entry was going to be
as Canadian as maple syrup or ice hockey. But no, Canadians voted for their new national slogan to be,
I kid you not,
as Canadian as possible under the circumstances.
Now, for those of you who are highly agreeable,
or maybe slightly Canadian,
you get this right away.
How could I ever say I'm any one thing
when I'm constantly adapting to try to please other people?
Disagreeable people do less of it. They're more critical, skeptical, challenging, I get this right away. How could I ever say I'm any one thing when I'm constantly adapting to try to please other people?
Disagreeable people do less of it.
They're more critical, skeptical, challenging,
and far more likely than their peers to go to law school.
That's not a joke, that's actually an empirical fact.
So I always assumed that agreeable people were givers
and disagreeable people were takers.
But then I gathered the data,
and I was stunned to find no correlation between those traits.
Because it turns out that agreeableness-disagreeableness
is your outer veneer.
How pleasant is it to interact with you?
Whereas giving and taking are more of your inner motives.
What are your values? What are your intentions toward others?
If you really want to judge people accurately,
you have to get to the moment that every consultant in the room is waiting for
and draw a two by two.
The agreeable givers are easy to spot. They say yes to everything.
The disagreeable takers are also recognized quickly, although you might call them by a slightly different name.
We forget about the other two combinations.
There are disagreeable givers in our organizations.
They're people who are gruff and tough on the surface,
but underneath have others' best interests at heart.
Or as an engineer put it,
oh, disagreeable givers,
like somebody with a bad user interface,
but a great operating system.
If that helps you.
Disagreeable givers are the most undervalued people in our organizations
because they're the ones who give the critical feedback
that no one wants to hear, but everyone needs to hear.
We need to do a much better job valuing these people
as opposed to writing them off early and saying,
eh, kind of prickly, must be a selfish taker.
The other combination we forget about is the deadly one,
the agreeable taker, also known as the faker.
This is the person who's nice to your face
and then will stab you right in the back.
And my favorite way to catch these people in the interview process
is to ask the question,
can you give me the names of four people
whose careers you have fundamentally improved? And the takers will give you four names,
and they will all be more influential than them, because takers are great at kissing up and then
kicking down. Givers are more likely to name people who are below them in a hierarchy,
who don't have as much power, who can do them no good. And let's face it, you all know you can
learn a lot about character by watching how someone treats their restaurant server or their Uber driver.
So if we do all this well, if we can weed takers out of organizations, if we can make it safe
to ask for help, if we can protect givers from burnout and make it okay for them to be ambitious
in pursuing their own goals, as well as trying to help other people, we can actually change the way
that people define success.
Instead of saying it's all about winning a competition,
people will realize success is really more about contribution.
I believe that the most meaningful way to succeed
is to help other people succeed.
And if we can spread that belief,
we can actually turn paranoia upside down.
There's a name for that. It's called pronoia.
Pronoia.
Pronoia is the delusional belief
that other people are plotting your well-being.
That they're going around behind your back
and saying exceptionally glowing things about you.
And the great thing about a culture of givers is
that's not a delusão, é realidade.
Olha, eu quero viver em um mundo onde donadores conseguem, como ele chama que tá todo mundo achando que tem alguém falando
nas suas costas, mas dessa vez a gente tá achando que tá falando bem
a gente vai ter muito mais incentivos
muito mais vontade de fazer as coisas irem
pro próximo nível, as coisas crescerem
tranquilidade, né?